Incoming livestream: Okay, thank you. Good afternoon, everybody. Today, I'll be talking about physical AI and how do we secure and govern physical AI in the wild.
Incoming livestream: I've been at Intel almost 3 decades.
Incoming livestream: And…
Incoming livestream: Most of my life has been spent on performance engineering, and started with all database benchmarks, et cetera, back in the 90s and early 2000s.
Incoming livestream: And since then, I have moved on to AI and looking at AI performance, and now I'm busy with architecting solutions and looking at how to bring in… extracting the best performance.
Incoming livestream: on the hardware, as well as looking at how do we secure and govern physical AI.
Incoming livestream: So, of course, you know, we are moving away from the digital world, and now the return of investment is in how do you deploy these AI systems physically?
Incoming livestream: Because that's where the money comes in.
Incoming livestream: So digital AI is more about acting on information, everything is on the screen, whereas physical AI, you are actually deploying it in the real world, and of course, when you go from a demo room to the real world, lots of things happen. Unprecedented things.
Incoming livestream: So, when AI's mistakes start moving into the real world, that's kinetic risk.
Incoming livestream: Right? And of course, in the digital world, we had the privilege of doing a Ctrl-Z, an undo, a reset, a reboot, everything was easy, you know? It's just like funny money. You have a lot of money in stock, it's all funny money until you realize the gains and when you pay taxes.
Incoming livestream: So now, when you start doing this, now, how do these errors manifest itself in physical AI?
Incoming livestream: So, of course, it's not just the speed of errors, because, yes, it's all the force and the motion and the physics of the errors, but there's also timing, because you need to detect these errors in time before the action takes place.
Incoming livestream: Of course, as you know, that in the physical AI space, the errors are not very reversible.
Incoming livestream: So the reason, this is of importance right now is 3 different kinds of technologies have crossed over.
Incoming livestream: We have sensors, and sensors have matured a lot. And of course, foundational models, frontier models, have become very stable, less of hallucinations, and the last part of it is edge compute. Edge compute is much more viable and feasible today. Now, these three vectors together have made the need
Incoming livestream: Increase the need for autonomous economy.
Incoming livestream: Let's talk about the building blocks of physical AI. Basically, think of it as a loop. You have sensors in the field.
Incoming livestream: Then, you have technology that detects the sensor… information from the sensors. Then you have something called the perception layer, which is basically making sense of the sensor's data.
Incoming livestream: And then you have the thinking. Thinking is basically trying to map the data, the state of the world, and the sensor data, and trying to figure… predict the next
Incoming livestream: State of the system.
Incoming livestream: And of course, you have reasoning and planning, what do I do? What… if I take this action, what is going to happen? And finally, it is more about controlling and actually driving the physical actions.
Incoming livestream: So, it's not a new concept. Physical AI was there.
Incoming livestream: Except that none of the technologies had matured enough for them to be deployed at scale in the field.
Incoming livestream: Okay? So in the 1950s and 2000… up to 2000, we had a lot of world models, which are basically control theory, robotics, etc, and they were able to look at the state and predict the next state of the system, so they could say that if I take this action, what is… what'll happen to the world?
Incoming livestream: Then, of course, came the LLMs, which are the brains, right?
Incoming livestream: the brains work, given what I see, what is a text, what action should I take?
Incoming livestream: what should be my response? And the next one is VLMs, the visual language models. If I… given what the text I see and the images I see.
Incoming livestream: what does this mean to me? What does this mean in the physical world? And finally, the vision language action models, which basically is saying, okay, given the perception, given the state of the world.
Incoming livestream: And what action should I take? That means, what do I tell the physical system, which is the robot? How much do I move, the arm of the robot, or the legs of the robot, etc.
Incoming livestream: So these three… all these come into play. Now, remember our, loop that we were talking about? The five layers? Now let's see how they map.
Incoming livestream: You have the sensors, you have the perceivers, right? Sensors are the standard sensors, the LiDARs, etc. The thinking is the world model.
Incoming livestream: And then the reasoning and the planning are the LLMs and the VLMs, and of course, the control and action are the actual robotic movements.
Incoming livestream: So now we'll go through a step where I'll take you through this physical stack.
Incoming livestream: As well as show you what happens when any of these layers fail.
Incoming livestream: Or what happens if this labor existed or not?
Incoming livestream: So the first layer at the bottom, which is the sensor, right? Now I just flipped it over, bottoms up.
Incoming livestream: So you have your sensors, very innocuous layer, just gathers information.
Incoming livestream: Then you have the perceiving layer.
Incoming livestream: You can see it better here. Yeah, the perception layer is making sense of the sensors, figuring out what are all these sensors, because of course, there could be sensors which are spoofed, sensors which are incorrect. It has to figure out which are the right sensors, and how do you…
Incoming livestream: Understand the correlation between all the sensor data, Then comes the world model.
Incoming livestream: Here, in this case, if you think of, we're going to pick up a coffee cup from the table.
Incoming livestream: So, here.
Incoming livestream: The cup is, sitting on a table. The world models actually figures out what is the amount of… what kind of cup is it, where do you grasp the cup so that the coffee doesn't spill.
Incoming livestream: Is the cup fragile or not? Is the desk… is a soft surface or a hard surface, etc. That is the world model. It looks and perceives the state of the world at that time.
Incoming livestream: And that, predicts what… what action should I take, and what will be the outcome of whatever action I take. That is the world model.
Incoming livestream: And from, basically, the world model is now looking at
Incoming livestream: this is, basically, should I grip it? If it's a fragile cup, I need to grip it very gently. If it is, you know, paper cups versus a ceramic cup, etc. If it has a handle or not, etc. All that is determined in this layer.
Incoming livestream: There you go.
Incoming livestream: cup gets lifted.
Incoming livestream: But if the prediction is wrong in this model, the cup is… you'll spill. You'll spill the coffee cup, because you're holding it wrong.
Incoming livestream: So then, of course, the LLMs, they reason and plan out the course of action, so that that… those sequence of actions will be given to the robot.
Incoming livestream: And of course, the VLA tells, you know, what kind of robot it is, and what is a… how many inches of whatever the arm has to move, etc, and at what angle, etc.
Incoming livestream: And that's when you move the coffee cup correctly. You can lift up the coffee cup.
Incoming livestream: So all of these layers have to work in conjunction.
Incoming livestream: Again, we'll talk about this as soon as we go deeper into this talk, we'll see that, you know, where the responsibility lies.
Incoming livestream: Who is the final Which is the final layer that controls all of this.
Incoming livestream: So, let's see what can go wrong.
Incoming livestream: I think many of us have been in these situations, in the older days, where the GPS is telling, make a U-turn, make a U-turn, make a U-turn. It's giving you advice, it is not giving you permission, right? It doesn't know anything about the physical world. It is just saying, you need to make a U-turn, you have missed your exit, right?
Incoming livestream: It's here, it's up to the human being to get into that loop and figure out whether it is safe to make the action. Today, of course, there are some hardware sensors which say, okay, we can't take that action, and you'll delay the action, which is fine.
Incoming livestream: Then there are other ways that…
Incoming livestream: things can go wrong in physical AI is, of course, if somebody spoofs, or has a… if there is a security attack.
Incoming livestream: So basically, these… both systems are unsafe, right? One is unsafe, it'll fail accidentally, like making a U-turn, whereas the secure, you know, injecting security vulnerability attacks, all that makes the system fail intentionally.
Incoming livestream: And that's why we need a fail-safe architecture. We'll get into how to build an architecture like that for physical AI systems.
Incoming livestream: Now, there's one other aspect, which is there in physical AI, That is not covered anywhere.
Incoming livestream: And that is latency.
Incoming livestream: So far, when we see LLMs, etc, remember LLMs started with a 7 billion model, or a 10, 15 million parameter model, and they went up to 405 million parameters.
Incoming livestream: Similarly, the context window started at 4K, 32K, 128, and a 1 million context window.
Incoming livestream: LLMs were scaling with the size of the model. VLAs don't scale with that.
Incoming livestream: We… for VLAs, It is the latency and the control which is most important.
Incoming livestream: And LLMs, Because latency is such an important criteria here for physical systems, LLMs can…
Incoming livestream: you know, the order in the… the work in the order of a few hundreds of milliseconds to seconds. I mean, I'm very familiar with, you know, optimizing for TTFT and Teapot in your LLM latency, generative AI latency techniques.
Incoming livestream: I mean, think about, everybody is touting their tokens per second, right? Million tokens per second, or 4 million tokens per second. What is all that? It's, ultimately, it is how many tokens can you process per second that is the latency.
Incoming livestream: In VLAs, You have your vision encoder models, you have the world models, and look at the timing there.
Incoming livestream: The latency targets for these are sub-millisecond range. The entire loop, from sensing all the way to the control and the action.
Incoming livestream: Is in… within 100 or 200 milliseconds.
Incoming livestream: So this becomes very critical, that now VLAs are not evolving with, you know, the scalability of VLAs is not the size anymore. Rather, how fast can they go?
Incoming livestream: And now, instead of saying that latency is a performance KPI, we talk about it as a safety parameter.
Incoming livestream: Latency is a safety parameter, because you can be 100% right.
Incoming livestream: But you can completely decide the right course of action, but if you come 10 milliseconds late, you're too late to the game.
Incoming livestream: So, think about you're driving a car, and, you know, you know that you have to stop.
Incoming livestream: At the stop sign, or a pedestrian suddenly, does a J… jaywalks around the thing.
Incoming livestream: You have to stop.
Incoming livestream: I mean, you can be perfectly right, you've sensed it, but if your reaction time is few minutes, few seconds, or milliseconds slow.
Incoming livestream: Then you actually hit the pedestrian.
Incoming livestream: In that entire pipeline, right, from the sensing till the control and action, there is a certain region where you can actually step back. Like, the world model has predicted, okay, this is the state it's going to be, LLM says this is a plan of action.
Incoming livestream: you can still reverse your actions. But once the VLA, the action, the language action model and the control have issued the action commands to the robot, to the physical system, it's too late.
Incoming livestream: You cannot reverse back.
Incoming livestream: The… another aspect of this is why human in the air… human in the loop fails.
Incoming livestream: For physical AI, it's not going to be. The human is not in the loop anymore. Or it cannot be in the loop.
Incoming livestream: Because humans cannot think in milliseconds. They are mostly in seconds and minutes.
Incoming livestream: So basically, you need something in the architecture, in the entire software stack.
Incoming livestream: That will eliminate the need for humans. Does that mean humans have no control? They do.
Incoming livestream: But the control of humans is more in the strategic thinking, decision, and planning, rather than in the execution. The execution should be all autonomous.
Incoming livestream: Humans can decide, plan, everything before. That means they create the intent, but they cannot actually be in the execution path.
Incoming livestream: So, lots of things can go wrong, right?
Incoming livestream: You can have, but what fail-safe architecture will do is answer how how to control
Incoming livestream: how to reduce these errors. So, you can have physical kill paths, right? You can have override buttons, you can degrade the performance of the system.
Incoming livestream: So that it fails more gracefully. That's very much in the reliability space that, you know, systems don't fail abruptly, but they degrade gracefully, etc. And you have deterministic control paths, you can have boundary latency, all of these techniques are there.
Incoming livestream: But that's where… this is the fail-safe architecture. So, fail-safe architecture, you can put all of this.
Incoming livestream: Who decides all this?
Incoming livestream: Who decides what the limits are, who decides what are the control paths, and who decides when to override that switch, or when to pull the plug on the, system?
Incoming livestream: And that is what is governance. Governance is that authority model which puts in all of these boundaries.
Incoming livestream: And that's where we need to worry about
Incoming livestream: What is… what is happening to governance here?
Incoming livestream: So basically, fail-safe is showing how safety works, and governance is saying how to
Incoming livestream: Who owns it, and who decides the fate of the system?
Incoming livestream: So, there are… Some basic primitives are there for governance.
Incoming livestream: some of this, like, timing and latency, right? So, as I said, you can be 100% right, but if you arrive late to the game, it's over.
Incoming livestream: So, timing and latency is one of the primitives.
Incoming livestream: Scope, what are the boundaries? Setting the physical boundaries.
Incoming livestream: For the execution path.
Incoming livestream: And when and how to override or pull the plug on the systems, whether it is you haul the system, or you degrade the system, all of that is the authority that you give.
Incoming livestream: And of course.
Incoming livestream: basically, if you want to stop the system, what is the escalation path? That means, is there a different way you can transition the system into a safer state without actually causing physical damage?
Incoming livestream: and accountability and traceability. There are two paths to accountability. The first one is evidence and traceability. And if you think of that.
Incoming livestream: What you need is continuous monitoring. Not monitoring the system and saying, oh, the model is 100% correct. I mean, we plug in a model, world model from somewhere, LLM model from somewhere else, and say, oh, the models are 100% accurate, and the data is all secure.
Incoming livestream: That doesn't mean anything.
Incoming livestream: At runtime, you need to monitor… you need to be able to recreate that incident.
Incoming livestream: Think about the movie Sully, right? It landed on the Hudson.
Incoming livestream: Tom Hanks, right? Tom Hanks. He landed the plane safely, but how long did that NTSB, or whoever was investigating? They did 17 trials to recreate that incident.
Incoming livestream: And so, that's the incident recreation is a very big challenge.
Incoming livestream: And by the way, black box, etc, came as a part of
Incoming livestream: failed regulations, and it didn't… they didn't decide that they would have a black box or, all of these, or air traffic control. There was no centralized air traffic control before the 1950s.
Incoming livestream: There were air crashes. That's when they enforced air traffic control. Similarly, the black box recorders came into existence because they had to recreate instance. They didn't know what happened when planes just disappeared off the face of the Earth.
Incoming livestream: So that's when all of these came between 1950 and 1970.
Incoming livestream: So that's incident creation, that means you need to be continuously monitoring and Telemetry is important, right?
Incoming livestream: And now, of course, governance cannot be sitting outside and controlling something. You can't just say, everything is accurate, I have all the paperwork, it works. No, it has to be inside the system. Governance should be inside the system and be setting the boundaries.
Incoming livestream: So, I'll just go a little fast, because I'm running out of time. So here, today, we can see, we can have a fail-safe architecture, we can have runtime control, and then we have governance.
Incoming livestream: Think about NIST, the EU AI Act. I'll briefly touch on that, but what? They are all on paper.
Incoming livestream: And they're not… they have no way of controlling the system. That's the gap, that's the red line gap here that we have.
Incoming livestream: Right?
Incoming livestream: So governance also should be embedded into the architecture.
Incoming livestream: So, NIST AI Framework, AI RMF, the Risk Management Framework, has four functions. Govern, map, manage, and measure.
Incoming livestream: And the EU AI Act classes the systems as some risk category. It just says low risk, medium risk, high risk, ultra-high risk, or whatever, right?
Incoming livestream: Again, it… the NIST AI framework does not talk about anything about physical AI at all.
Incoming livestream: Okay? It doesn't talk about physical AI at all, so it's missing the real-time monitoring. It is missing, you know, what kind of,
Incoming livestream: Controls should be put in.
Incoming livestream: Because it's all about model attestation, model accuracy, data purity, etc, but nothing related to the physical world. And EU AI Act doesn't even want to touch the physical AI systems, it says, oh.
Incoming livestream: We just classify the systems as risk, different risk categories, and we pass it on to the sectoral departments, which is basically, if you were deploying the robot in the hospital.
Incoming livestream: the medical laws come into picture to define what the boundaries are. So.
Incoming livestream: It's basically, like, there's a gap here.
Incoming livestream: Between the frameworks.
Incoming livestream: The frameworks are not actually… They're not ready for physical AI, to be frank.
Incoming livestream: And, not to… I think the problem is, technology and… the…
Incoming livestream: Real technology part is innovating very fast in all dimensions, and
Incoming livestream: The government, etc, and these policies are very, very slow to evolve.
Incoming livestream: So, we have to make that…
Incoming livestream: enhancements to the policies to adopt a physical AI. And physical AI is the…
Incoming livestream: Thing that is going to scale this year.
Incoming livestream: So this one, I will just skip.
Incoming livestream: There's one other part that I've said, accountability.
Incoming livestream: Who is accountable?
Incoming livestream: Now, think of for your… I mean, how many times have you heard of the Tesla or, some other car, right? I'm not just…
Incoming livestream: something…
Incoming livestream: it causes physical damage, it causes a fatality. Who is to blame, right? Is it the moral? Is it the developer? Is it the integrator? All of these, right?
Incoming livestream: They need to come… you need to assign that
Incoming livestream: Liability over the entire software stack.
Incoming livestream: So basically, the sensors…
Incoming livestream: Poor guys, they're just giving the data out. The sensors, they're not doing anything. Collecting the data, passing the data to the sensor layer. Sensors are not to blame, they have minimal responsibility.
Incoming livestream: the world model, To some extent, yes.
Incoming livestream: But it only… it can only do what it sees. It sees something, it gets the sensor data.
Incoming livestream: And it sees the world and can predict.
Incoming livestream: So, it also has some partial a responsibility. But ultimately, This… the control.
Incoming livestream: this layer, the control layer, is the ultimately… ultimate layer which is responsible for anything. So liability is actually flowing up the stack.
Incoming livestream: The last layer, the last actor that could have prevented that action is liable for any physical damage.
Incoming livestream: Of course, we said humans cannot be in the loop, right?
Incoming livestream: There is no way that humans can be in the loop and act in the sub-millisecond range, so what can humans do?
Incoming livestream: humans can set the boundaries, so what they have to do is
Incoming livestream: It's not that they're not having control, but the control is outside of the execution loop.
Incoming livestream: So, humans have the strategic authority, they can design the boundaries, they can decide about the architecture, etc, and the machines have to execute to that.
Incoming livestream: And of course, you have all the governance guardrails, which are rate limiters, energy caps, and geofencing, etc, and that needs to be decided by governance.
Incoming livestream: Well, there are some things that we have to accept, right?
Incoming livestream: Physical AI is going to fail.
Incoming livestream: It is going to fail. You cannot have a perfect system. If somebody is trying to sell you a perfect system.
Incoming livestream: I mean, I think, I don't know what you want to call it, but…
Incoming livestream: It's just take it with a grain of salt, I would say.
Incoming livestream: You cannot have physical AI systems which… zero risk is impossible.
Incoming livestream: It's about damage control, not damage prevention.
Incoming livestream: Okay? It can never be perfect. You have to be able to control damage. It'll never…
Incoming livestream: Okay? It's not about how a system… it's not about, will a system fail? It will fail, but how will it fail? And how can you prevent that failure is important.
Incoming livestream: That's the key thing in governance and designing a fail-safe architecture.
Incoming livestream: So we need to have governance run in the runtime.
Incoming livestream: And we have to have, info safety, et cetera, certifications, and now we are not talking about a model certification from OpenAI, or Google, or Anthropic, but we are talking about entire system-level certifications that needs to be… that needs to be certified, if you want to have a… have a physical AI system.
Incoming livestream: So basically, if you want to have physical AI systems deployed in the world.
Incoming livestream: You need to make sure that You have enforced governance.
Incoming livestream: So, if you don't design governance in, you're going to hear it in accident reports, lawsuits, and, making headlines.
Incoming livestream: Okay? So, that's my story here about physical AI. Thank you.
Incoming livestream: Go ahead. Hello. Oh, there we go. Alright, I think we have time for one question. Does anyone have a good question? Otherwise, I have a question.
Incoming livestream: Alright, here we go.
Incoming livestream: I can show a demo if you want. We have done a small demo which shows how
Incoming livestream: Human in the loop does not work.
Incoming livestream: Pardon?
Incoming livestream: No, it's a very short demo.
Incoming livestream: Oh, 8 seconds?
Incoming livestream: Then, never mind.
Incoming livestream: That's okay, I thought we had 5 minutes here.
Incoming livestream: That's, that's the hard, that's the hard stop where I can stop. That's the hard stop. Yes, ma'am
Incoming livestream: I do have one brief question for you, it's more, philosophy than maybe technical. Okay.
Incoming livestream: In the United States, I can't speak for Europe, we tend to wait until a market winner emerges, and then we write a bunch of regulation after that, right, to do that. When we're talking about car crashes, specifically my car.
Incoming livestream: Obviously we can't wait, but I don't think that this market is immune to what happened to everything else, banking, energy, weapons, all that stuff. Do you see any movement that says, hey, we're taking this seriously, or is it just talking? Well, we are seeing a little bit, right, with the beautiful bill and et cetera, and a lot of activities.
Incoming livestream: But again, the pace of innovation on technology side is way faster than the governance today.
Incoming livestream: Right? And, I mean, just 2 days ago, we had the drone problem, right?
Incoming livestream: the… a good room.
Incoming livestream: from DHS was brought down.
Incoming livestream: just some lack of communication, and actually, that was a human-in-the-loop problem. Why did the Department of Homeland Security have to inform the Pentagon that they were launching a drone?
Incoming livestream: You don't need to do that. You don't need a human in the loop to say, okay, you have the permission to do it. This should have happened automatically.
Incoming livestream: So… this needs to happen, and I think, hopefully, the governance will change.
Incoming livestream: Thank you very much.
Incoming livestream: Alright, 20 minutes starts now.
Incoming livestream: Oh, it's gonna restart?
Incoming livestream: Okay, sweet.
Incoming livestream: Alright, end of day, everyone's excited, right? Okay.